---
title: "I'll be back, eventually"
date: "2020-04-29T16:05:34-07:00"
publishDate: "2020-04-29T16:05:34-07:00"
description: "On my impending absence, and this blog."
series: post
---

## Introduction
If you're reading this, you're either a) genuinely here to get the best of Kewbish content, b) someone I met through GCI and is here to stalk me, or c) a classmate, probably here to fish for blackmail. To all of you - I say hello. And goodbye, just for a bit.  

I've decided to move my current [website](https://kewbish.github.io) over to [Hugo](https://gohugo.io), and with doing that, I can also integrate this blog directly into that repo instead. As well, it's been about a year since I first made my site, and I've learned a lot more about design and feel that I should upgrade it. I'm not too happy with the design of my main site, and while this blog is alright, it isn't consistent with my main site. It'll be a lot easier to manage one cohesive Kewbish look when everything's migrated to one place. Both sites are, as of now, going under construction, and probably won't have actual content for a while.  

The past few blog posts are going to stay here as I rework my main site, but when I'm done, I'll move them there. In the meantime, feel free to browse here and read whatever. My main site's pretty barren right now - just a placeholder and reminder about its rework, so there won't be much to see there. Theoretically, you can still see my site as I build it as a WIP if you dig around the URLs and GitHub repo enough, but try not to do that too much, yeah?  

So instead of doing my homework, I've decided to leave this last little note here (which will be deleted when this version of Yours, Kewbish goes down). Don't worry - I'll be back. Promise.  

## Currently
I just finished [my social justice project](https://diveintoht.ml), and am just polishing up some things. I'm waiting to promote it til I have everything down 100% and have the site tested a couple times, but if you'd like to *dive into HTML* or check it out - feel free!  
Otherwise, I'll be working on my website. For a while. Hopefully, it won't be too long, but we never know.  