---
title: "CS50: Week 5"
date: "2020-07-19T19:06:12-07:00"
publishDate: "2020-07-19T19:06:12-07:00"
description: "On my final encounters with C."
series: private
Dev: "https://dev.to/kewbish/cs50-week-5-113g"
---

## Introduction

Finally, we're over the worst of CS50 (in my opinion, at least). Week 5 was a bit of a difficult lesson and problem set, but in the end, it _actually_ wasn't as hard as I thought it'd be.[^1] Week 5 covers data structures - detailing hash tables, linked lists, and tries, which are a combination of both! Speller was a decent challenge, and for once, I really felt that I was applying what I learned in lecture to the problem. This is the week I was looking the most forward to (my original purpose for taking CS50 was for data structures and algorithms after all), and dreading as well.

## Notes

Alright, here are my notes:

- you can't reassign something if it doesn't exist yet
  - remember to initialize to a chunk of memory
- also, you should remember malloc's effects if you reassign, and free if you reassign a malloc
- arrays are difficult to resize, because they're initialized to a certain amount of memory
  - could move a copy of the array to a larger, free area
  - then can delete old copy
- we could also use realloc
  - as its name implies, it reallocates memory
  - give it the pointer of the old array
  - will return address of new array
  - remember to free variable
- data structures are custom structures to store information
  - made with structs
  - builds off included data types
- linked lists
  - basically an array, but each element points to the next one
  - elements are not together in memory
  - each element includes a pointer to the next
- can't access the middle of the list with just [x] notation
  - there isn't a 'middle'
  - need to navigate through the entire list first
- also takes twice as much memory per element
  - needs to store the next pointer
- usually constructed of a struct
  - one part to store the actual data, and the same struct pointing to the next struct
  - initialize first to NULL, so you can assign
- introduce a new notation, -> notation
  - similar to dot notation of a pointer
  - `node->next = x;`
- need to use a while loop to iterate through the properties
  - check if not NULL
  - set the variable
- if you want to add to the beginning
  - set a pointer to point to the beginning
  - then set the list to the last pointer
  - inserts a node at the beginning
- to insert in the middle
  - do something similar
  - need to create a temporary variable for the swap
- linked lists are O(n) time, need to follow each node pointer to find the next
- also introduces a tree
  - each node points to two nodes, like the famous binary search tree
  - makes binary search very easy, only compare two nodes
  - makes insertion easy as well, only rearrange a small subset
  - search is O(log n)
- need to balance these though, or else may become reweighted
  - also memory-expensive, but can search faster
- hashtable combines arrays and linked lists
  - each element in the array is a linked list
  - can add elements quickly, and the initial searching time is decreased
  - however, they might all end up in the same element, in which case the time efficiency is negated
  - get as close as possible to O(1) when the number of elements equals the possible values
- retrieval tree provides O(1) searching, but at cost of space
  - stores each level of element (here, letters) in a separate array
  - in this example, 26x as much memory
- more data structures
  - stacks -> last in, first out, like email inbox
  - queue -> first in, first out, like line in a store
  - dictionary -> map keys to values, like Python!
- these data structures can be implemented with arrays, linked lists, hashtables, and other structures

## Problem Set

This week wasn't much of a problem _set_ - we only had Speller to work through. But don't underestimate it either - it took two consecutive days of work to finish out. The logic wasn't too hard to implement, actually.
First, I split up the problem in its subparts

- `hash` -> I decided to use the simplest hash function - just the first character. Could this be optimized? Yes, but I just wanted to try the data structure out first, and not have to worry about copying a hash function that I didn't completely understand either.
- `load` -> Made an array, and I'd put each word into its appropriate element. I just appended the current word to the end of the linked list, and lowercased it as well.
- `size` -> In load, I'd created a line to increment a global variable, which made size just a `return count;` statement.
- `check` -> I hashed the current word to compare, and then used a while loop to iterate over the linked list and checked if it matched the current targeted word.
- `unload` -> I iterated over each element in the array, and again iterated over the linked list to free each pointer in the list.

The first time I wrote the program, it worked as intended, so check. But, upon check50-ing, I got a bunch of valgrind errors. I had forgotten to free a bunch of malloc'ed variables, and to fix this, I tried to use a character array instead. Also, I finally learned to use valgrind properly - I'd kind of ignored it in the past week, given that there wasn't a check for a memory leak, just a reminder that it could exist. I also realized that my unload function was logically incorrect, and would always return true right away. After fixing this, I attempted to test it - but now, it didn't produce the intended output. Oops.

I stripped out the entire program, and rewrote it from scratch, including what I'd learned about valgrind and memory allocation in the first runthrough. (Now that I think about it, I did have some confusion about `>` vs `>>` in bash. They overwrite a file while redirecting output and append to a file while redirecting, respectively. I probably mixed `>` up with `>>`, and that's actually probably why it didn't work as intended, meaning the logic was solid initially, meaning I rewrote it from scratch for essentially nothing. Big facepalm.)

Now, I was memory leak free, and working with the correct output. Nice! In the process of scrolling dozens of Stack Overflow pages, I really learned to appreciate the full power of valgrind. It's a great resource for checking memory leaks, and despite its rather scary, confusing interface, it's an essential tool, really. I never had to keep memory management in mind while Pythoning, but C made me more cognizant of the lower-level management that goes into the easy-to-learn Python flow.

## Conclusion

Am I going to continue with C? I doubt it, unless I'm just making a toy thing, or _really_ want performance for something. Would I have ignored C if I were to take some version of CS50 where I didn't need CS50? Probably not. I've learned a lot about lower level things, like memory management and bytes, as well as getting a glimpse into how easy-to-use features in Python were really implemented. As other people have said, working with C makes one really appreciate how nice higher level languages like Python are to work with, and it was a great experience.

That said, I still can't wait to get into the later half of CS50 - Python, SQL, and web? Yes, thank you very much. I guess this would be the more _application_ side of CS50, and I'm excited to get learning.

[^1]: The CS50 Reddit and my initial lack of experience with data structures were pretty scary. But I'd rate this problem set lower than Tideman in difficulty, honestly.
