## Introduction
I think I've mentioned it before, but ironically, the thing that interested me the most in programming was low- and no-code tools. Specifically, I had a bit of a phase in which I fancied myself a game developer, while simultaneously not being able to write a single line of my own code - though that came a bit later once I got older. I think game dev was my first real foray into any sort of programming, unless those endless rounds of [Lightbot](https://lightbot.com/) in elementary school computer class counted. I recall it being surprisingly easy to get started: there's a wealth of code-free development engines available, especially targeted at children: from the ubiquitous [Scratch](https://scratch.mit.edu/), to [Roblox](https://roblox.com), the addicting launcher and editor that supplied many an hour of obbying fun[^1]. While I no longer have original files[^2], I thought it'd be interesting to take a dive into the tools and engines that, well, 'raised' me - at least until I found out what web development was.

I grew up

I think it's kind of poetic that what ended up drawing me to development were such low-tech (well, low-code and low-effort) tools.

In the process of writing this post, I realized I had a lot more to reminisce about than I'd initially thought I did, so I'll split this post into two. This post will cover the tools that I used, and how each of them shaped my development journey, while the next post will tackle more about the projects I worked on and the impacts game development and indie game culture have had on my experiences to date.

## The GameMaker Era

## Climbing the Social Ladder 

## 'Hacking' GDevelop 

## Bitsy
- Bitsy for story games, limitations were cool

## Pixelpad and Unity
- under the gui
- Unity once I'd started to fancy myself an actual game developer

## Conclusion
- beyond

[^1]: We used to have to share laptops in grade 6, so while most people would fight over their assigned partner to finagle the most screen time, my friend and I agreed to use one computer and play together. Oddly more democratic and a lot less chaotic than most other arrangements, but that's besides the point. We were both into obbies, or glorified 3D platformers that generally had elaborate level design and often story levels, though our favourite, which I think was called Wipeout, was a pretty straightforward obby in terms of mechanics. One of us used to control the WASD keys, and the other would deal with jumping. To be honest, it was a lot more efficient than most teamwork I had since then, which might either say something about the sheer focus put into making precarious jumps, or something about effective organization.

[^2]: Well, I technically do have an archive of all of my work dating back roughly to 2019, which is when I just took all the work previously and zipped it up. However, I don't think half the project files would load properly with recent versions of the tools, and I can't be bothered to deal with the hassle of trying to find old releases and fix everything up for a few screenshots.
