---
title: "Indie Games: Projects"
date: "2021-06-13T18:52:15-07:00"
publishDate: "2021-06-13T18:52:15-07:00"
description: "On the products of my game dev adventures."
series: post
---

## Introduction
I lied in my last post: I do actually [have the original files](https://kewbi.sh/blog/posts/210523/#fn:2) for a surprising number of my projects. The other day, I was looking through old backups and archives, and found a couple interesting folders. Here's a look at what eleven-year-old me thought was peak indie game development:
```text
archives/
├─ anInfiniteBath.zip/
├─ bleedingPenguins.zip/
├─ botanicPiano.zip/
├─ closer.zip/
├─ OHMagosh.zip/
```
These are some of my Unity games, made a couple years ago, sometime before the end of 2018. I'll expand a bit more on the projects, but just looking through the old files's brought me right back to developing each of the experiences. Back then, I spent more time making cute pixel art characters than actually developing, but that was part of my signature aesthetic.

That ideal aesthetic was developed over many an hour trawling through [itch.io](https://itch.io), a digital marketplace focusing on sharing and selling indie games of all genres. I really liked the vibe of the site as a kid - there was just something about the simple theming and easily discoverable games[^1]. When I started looking for places to share my games (after all, I very much was validated by watching download counts tick very slowly up over time), I went straight to customizing my profile and uploading WebGL files to itch.io. I spent a while learning HTML and CSS to fine-tune my landing pages there, and I think it's made a clear impact in the aesthetic that continues to influence my design decisions to this day. Game jams and development communities centered there gave me a starting point and many sources of inspiration throughout the process of trying to learn how to develop - in short, it was a pretty interesting environment.

In this post, I'd like to reflect on some of my past projects and other aspects of my past game dev journey, such as the various communities and influences that somehow combined to build my aesthetic. This is a continuation of my last post: if you're interested, I discussed some of the [tools and engines](https://kewbi.sh/blog/posts/210523/) I used back then.

## Itch.io Inspiration
- joining the discord server
- seeing other games and concepts

## Indie Game Charm

## The Game Jam Grind
- even thought i never made anything

## Experiments and Examples
I liked making proof of concepts, toying around with environments and game mechanics, instead of worrying about gameplay. It helped me learn how to work through design problems, and piece together how to create simple interactive environments.

## Conclusion

=== outline ===
- Itchio inspiration and seeing other games and concepts, the discord server
- Game jam grinding even though I never made anything
- Some examples of what I used to make => little experiments and one-scene wonders
	- Liked playing with the concepts and making proof of environments not worrying about gameplay
	- learning to actually code
- The charm of indie games, the aesthetics

[^1]: I specifically remember spending way too much time at school clicking through the [randomizer](https://itch.io/randomizer), which you could fine-tune to narrow down tags and platform types. There was something very magical about the way it managed to spit out highly appealing games every couple clicks, though I suppose that's also a testament to the quality of the games hosted there. itch.io also has a very nice tagging system, which I recall tabbing through as well. The [pixel art](https://itch.io/games/tag-pixel-art), [2D](https://itch.io/games/tag-2d), [casual](https://itch.io/games/tag-casual), and [cute](https://itch.io/games/tag-cute) tags were the ones I frequented the most, which I guess exposes my entire taste right there.
